---
layout: post
title: "The Hunchback of Notre-Dame"
author: Victor Hugo
category: Hugo
tags: French Historical
---
**THE GRAND HALL**

Three hundred and forty-eight years, six months, and nineteen days ago to-day,
the Parisians awoke to the sound of all the bells in the triple circuit of the
city, the university, and the town ringing a full peal<!--more-->.

The sixth of January, 1482, is not, however, a day of which history has
preserved the memory. There was nothing notable in the event which thus set the
bells and the bourgeois of Paris in a ferment from early morning. It was neither
an assault by the Picards nor the Burgundians, nor a hunt led along in
procession, nor a revolt of scholars in the town of Laas, nor an entry of “our
much dread lord, monsieur the king,” nor even a pretty hanging of male and
female thieves by the courts of Paris. Neither was it the arrival, so frequent
in the fifteenth century, of some plumed and bedizened embassy. It was barely
two days since the last cavalcade of that nature, that of the Flemish
ambassadors charged with concluding the marriage between the dauphin and
Marguerite of Flanders, had made its entry into Paris, to the great annoyance of
M. le Cardinal de Bourbon, who, for the sake of pleasing the king, had been
obliged to assume an amiable mien towards this whole rustic rabble of Flemish
burgomasters, and to regale them at his Hôtel de Bourbon, with a very “pretty
morality, allegorical satire, and farce,” while a driving rain drenched the
magnificent tapestries at his door.

What put the “whole population of Paris in commotion,” as Jehan de Troyes
expresses it, on the sixth of January, was the double solemnity, united from
time immemorial, of the Epiphany and the Feast of Fools.

On that day, there was to be a bonfire on the Place de Grève, a maypole at the
Chapelle de Braque, and a mystery at the Palais de Justice. It had been cried,
to the sound of the trumpet, the preceding evening at all the cross roads, by
the provost’s men, clad in handsome, short, sleeveless coats of violet camelot,
with large white crosses upon their breasts.

So the crowd of citizens, male and female, having closed their houses and shops,
thronged from every direction, at early morn, towards some one of the three
spots designated.

Each had made his choice; one, the bonfire; another, the maypole; another, the
mystery play. It must be stated, in honor of the good sense of the loungers of
Paris, that the greater part of this crowd directed their steps towards the
bonfire, which was quite in season, or towards the mystery play, which was to be
presented in the grand hall of the Palais de Justice (the courts of law), which
was well roofed and walled; and that the curious left the poor, scantily
flowered maypole to shiver all alone beneath the sky of January, in the cemetery
of the Chapel of Braque.
