---
layout: post
title: "Les Miserables"
author: Victor Hugo
date: 1862-05-23
categories: Hugo
---
In 1815, M. Charles-Francois-Bienvenu Myriel was Bishop of D-- He was an old man
of about seventy-five years of age; he had occupied the see of D-- since 1806.<!--more-->

Although this detail has no connection whatever with the real substance of what
we are about to relate, it will not be superfluous, if merely for the sake of
exactness in all points, to mention here the various rumors and remarks which
had been in circulation about him from the very moment when he arrived in the
diocese. True or false, that which is said of men often occupies as important a
place in their lives, and above all in their destinies, as that which they do.
M. Myriel was the son of a councillor of the Parliament of Aix; hence he
belonged to the nobility of the bar. It was said that his father, destining him
to be the heir of his own post, had married him at a very early age, eighteen or
twenty, in accordance with a custom which is rather widely prevalent in
parliamentary families. In spite of this marriage, however, it was said that
Charles Myriel created a great deal of talk. He was well formed, though rather
short in stature, elegant, graceful, intelligent; the whole of the first portion
of his life had been devoted to the world and to gallantry.

The Revolution came; events succeeded each other with precipitation; the
parliamentary families, decimated, pursued, hunted down, were dispersed. M.
Charles Myriel emigrated to Italy at the very beginning of the Revolution. There
his wife died of a malady of the chest, from which she had long suffered. He had
no children. What took place next in the fate of M. Myriel? The ruin of the
French society of the olden days, the fall of his own family, the tragic
spectacles of ’93, which were, perhaps, even more alarming to the emigrants who
viewed them from a distance, with the magnifying powers of terror,—did these
cause the ideas of renunciation and solitude to germinate in him? Was he, in the
midst of these distractions, these affections which absorbed his life, suddenly
smitten with one of those mysterious and terrible blows which sometimes
overwhelm, by striking to his heart, a man whom public catastrophes would not
shake, by striking at his existence and his fortune? No one could have told: all
that was known was, that when he returned from Italy he was a priest.

In 1804, M. Myriel was the Curé of B—— [Brignolles]. He was already advanced in
years, and lived in a very retired manner.

About the epoch of the coronation, some petty affair connected with his
curacy—just what, is not precisely known—took him to Paris. Among other powerful
persons to whom he went to solicit aid for his parishioners was M. le Cardinal
Fesch. One day, when the Emperor had come to visit his uncle, the worthy Curé,
who was waiting in the anteroom, found himself present when His Majesty passed.
Napoleon, on finding himself observed with a certain curiosity by this old man,
turned round and said abruptly:—

“Who is this good man who is staring at me?”

“Sire,” said M. Myriel, “you are looking at a good man, and I at a great man.
Each of us can profit by it.”

That very evening, the Emperor asked the Cardinal the name of the Curé, and some
time afterwards M. Myriel was utterly astonished to learn that he had been
appointed Bishop of D——

What truth was there, after all, in the stories which were invented as to the
early portion of M. Myriel’s life? No one knew. Very few families had been
acquainted with the Myriel family before the Revolution.
